MUSINGS ON WIN+4
================
It's somewhat common knowledge that Microsoft released a multitasking version
of MS-DOS in 1986. Bearing the version number 4.0, it was in truth based on DOS
2, originally called DOS 3, and renamed to DOS 4 as a result of the "real" 
DOS 3. Due to running in real-mode, with only 640K of total memory, a lack of
multiple address spaces, and no hardware virtualization, it was a somewhat
ridiculous proposition as a commercial product. Of course, as Larry Osterman
attested, the purpose wasn't really to multitask a bunch of MS-DOS programs;
Microsoft knew that in a world where so few apps were well-behaved, that
wasn't feasible. Microsoft pitched it to OEMs of specialized PCs that 
integrated unique functionality (including a telephone switch), with the idea
being that such a machine could leverage the multitasking to both serve as a
regular DOS PC and, in the background, perform its other functions. Ultimately,
Microsoft began an effort to port Multitasking MS-DOS 4.0 to the 80286's
protected mode in an attempt to make it more useful, birthing DOS 5 (what 
would eventually be known as OS/2).

OS/2's shared DNA with Multitasking MS-DOS 4 is obvious. Both utilize the New
Executable (NE) format, which supports dynamic linking (LINK4.EXE; the NE 
linker seen in early Win16 SDKs, is so named for the format coming from MTDOS),
both use a rewritten COMMAND.COM written in C (which ultimately lives on in
Windows NT), and both can run only one "old" MS-DOS app (with somewhat flaky
compatibility even then) alongside the multitasked "new" applications. Also, 
the Session Manager in MTDOS bears a strong resemblance to the Program 
Selector in beta versions of OS/2.

One of the supposed killer apps of Multitasking MS-DOS 4.0, however, never
materialized, likely due to the project never achieving anything approaching 
the mainstream success that would have justified such an effort: Win+4.

It is well-known that 16-bit Windows was cooperatively-multitasked, meaning
that a new task doesn't get to run until a previous task explicitly releases
control. The Windows programming model is "event-driven", meaning that as a
general rule, programs don't do any processing until prompted to do so by 
the system. As such, the program sits in a "message loop", calling functions
such as GetMessage to get a message and then process it in the window 
procedure. GetMessage is one such synchronization point that yields control,
allowing the scheduler to let a new task run. As long as all of the apps play
nice, this works pretty well.

However, it's also well-documented that Microsoft had planned to allow use of
the Multitasking MS-DOS 4.0 scheduler to preemptively multitask Windows 1.0
tasks, producing a system known as "Win+4", though this never came to pass.
Before examining the challenges inherent in implementing Win+4, let's look at
what did come out that's at least related to it. First of all, at least one
OEM did get Windows running on Multitasking MS-DOS. Unfortunately, it's
somewhat underwhelming, as Windows just runs as "the old MS-DOS app", meaning
that it's just regular Windows, running the same way it would on any other DOS
system. What Win+4 really turned into, however, was the OS/2 Presentation
Manager. OS/2's GUI system was obviously inspired by and based on Windows, and
naturally it is also preemptively-multitasked.

However, why would Win+4 have been so prohibitive to implement?

Well, the problem is that Windows essentially executed as a monolith; all of
your tasks lived together, shared the DLLs, and global variables were
everywhere. This was fine because it was expected that a Windows API call
would never be interrupted, but with a preemptive-multitasking setup, this
would happen. Without a major rearchitecting of the entire core of the OS,
this would be impossible.

Microsoft, in fact, never made Win16 reentrant. On Windows 95, for instance,
only one task can be inside of Win16 at a time. When a task enters Win16, it
claims the Win16Mutex, and when it leaves Win16, it releases the Win16Mutex.
This worked reasonably well because Win16 processes remained cooperatively-
multitasked with respect to each other, with the Win16Mutex held while any
one of them is actively running, and there's explicit synchronization points
for Win32 tasks to enter and exit Win16. This was done for several reasons.
First of all, there were size issues; adding a bunch of locks everywhere 
would have made the code bigger and slower. There were also time issues; the
Windows 95 project shipped late as it was. And of course, there were 
compatibility issues, as many Win16 apps would rely on very precise patterns
of timing and message delivery order that could be guaranteed by Win16.

There were two preemptive implementations of Win16, but they're sort of
cheating. First of all, the Windows Libraries for OS/2 (nee Source Migration
Kit, nee Porthole) allow Win16 apps to execute preemptively. This is done by
giving each process its own private versions of the Win16 DLLs that are 
implemented on top of the OS/2 Presentation Manager APIs. Amusingly enough,
when discussing Windows 3.0 application support for OS/2 2.0, IBM actually
expressed a desire to run each Windows 3.0 app in its own VDM, and that's
actually pretty close to the situation under WLO, since each application
executes in its own address space (though that can improve stability, it also
precludes certain kinds of inter-process communication involving shared
memory). Of course WLO wasn't fully-compatible due to not allowing MS-DOS
interrupt calls, but it was impressive. Running each app in its own VDM would
have been RAM-prohibitive at the time, however.

That was an option under Windows NT, however. You could run each Win16 app
under its own instance of WOW/NTVDM. Each would execute with its own version of
the Windows KERNEL sitting on top of DOS, with stub DLLs for GDI and USER that
simply call into GDI32 and USER32. This enabled seamless desktop sharing (only
possible on OS/2 through display driver trickery).
