Windows & XMS Memory
====================
Windows 95 and above are known not to function with any XMS drivers other than
Microsoft's own (i.e. the version of HIMEM.SYS included with the OS, or the
equivalent XMSMMGR.EXE). In fact, Microsoft had already cautioned users
against mixing and matching incompatible versions of HIMEM.SYS and EMM386 [1],
as they must cooperate in a very particular way to make everything work nicely.

Usually, when loading a DPMI host, the demands of the XMS driver are somewhat
modest. It simply has to allocate all available XMS memory to later be
parceled out as extended memory blocks via DPMI. Any existing XMS blocks are
still valid and can still be accessed, but you won't be able to allocate any
new XMS memory (not that there's much reason to in a protected-mode program).

Note that properly, in Microsoft's hierarchy of different standards for 
handling the extended memory capabilities of 80386 machines, VCPI would sit
atop XMS (meaning that a VCPI server, which is a special type of LIMulator,
would allocate the extended memory) and then the DPMI host would use VCPI to
switch itself into protected-mode and provide protected-mode services, but
that's beside the point.

In any event, Windows (and indeed, EMM386) is somewhat special. Any LIMulator
needs extended memory to later parcel out and map as expanded memory. Early on,
this memory would likely come from INT15, since EMM386/CEMM actually predates
HIMEM, but eventually, extended memory would be allocated using XMS
(Microsoft's documentation even lists a requirement to load HIMEM.SYS before
EMM386). Note that you can actually specify on the command line a certain
amount of extended (XMS) memory to still be available after EMM386 loads,
and I'm also not entirely sure how existing XMS handles are supported under
EMM386 given the issues I describe in the next paragraph.

Meanwhile, most XMS drivers utilize unreal mode to copy extended memory blocks.
On the 80286, they can use LOADALL to set segment bases above 1MB, while on
the 80386 one can simply switch to protected-mode, set segment limits to 4GB,
switch back to real mode, and then do a rep movsd. The problem is that these
tricks cause general protection faults in Virtual-8086 Mode. This isn't a 
problem for most DPMI hosts, which switch back to real mode for handling MS-DOS
code, but it precludes the XMS driver from running inside of the virtual 
machine. Drivers that use the AT's INT15 extended memory copy interface could
theoretically work, but only for memory below 16MB (due to a limitation of the
interface), and only if the 386 control program implemented that interface
(which I'd fear issues from relating to physical vs linear addresses, and just
general system integrity/security issues relating to, so I don't think most
386 control programs really supported this interface).

For a while, this wasn't a huge problem; Windows/386 does provide any XMS 
services to V86 callers (except for HMA management to the System VM), but 
Windows 3 and later do provide XMS services.

Most of the open-source LIMulators such as JEMM386 appear to address this by
also providing XMS services, essentially being a combined XMS/EMS solution.

However, Windows does something interesting due to a key requirement of its
nature as a DOS multitasker. It needs to provide each DOS virtual machine with
its own private state, making it think that it has total control over the 
machine, but also keep certain bits of global state coherent between all DOS
virtual machines (mostly relating to drivers/TSRs loaded before Windows
started). By the time of Windows 3, enough drivers allocated extended memory
that any XMS handles allocated before Windows started needed to remain valid
(and be usable from any VM in global memory) while Windows was running.

It solved this by allocating every single XMS handle in the system on startup.
[2] It doesn't do this, as you might think, to actually allocate extended
memory for use by the system later, since each allocation is for 0 bytes. 
Windows is only doing this to exhaust all of the available XMS handles, to get
a list of XMS handles that are guaranteed not to be in use before Windows
starts, so those are free to be given out by Windows' internal XMS driver,
being per-VM local handles, so naturally Windows' own code is responsible for
handling them. 

However, if the handle is not one that Windows recognizes, they are assumed to
be global XMS handles and passed to the existing XMS driver [3]. However, how
could such an XMS driver run under Windows? All of the VMs run in Ring 3, making
the aforementioned unreal-mode trickery impossible.

The answer would likely be that Microsoft's own XMS drivers cooperate with
Windows in some undocumented way, possibly with the XMS drivers receiving an 
INT 2FH notification of Windows loading and then adjusting their behavior to
actually run under Windows. Raymond's article describes a "brain-dump"
interface provided by some XMS drivers that Windows 3 could take advantage of
if available, so it's not out of the realm of believability.

There's also the matter of detecting memory to make part of Windows' physical
memory pool. HIMEM.SYS allocates memory from the bottom of extended memory
(technically not actually the beginning, actually starting at 1MB+64K so as not
to collide with the HMA) on up (I believe using a VDISK header), which is in 
opposition to the INT15 style of memory allocation where you allocate memory 
from the top down, hooking INT15 to report less and less extended memory 
installed. 

Once you make your first XMS allocation, HIMEM hooks INT15 to report 0 
extended memory installed (this isn't always true; you can tell HIMEM to keep
some INT15 memory reserved, but there's a caveat - if you reserve 256K of INT15
memory, then that memory starts at 1MB, and even HIMEM starts at 1MB+256K, but
that makes the HMA unavailable since the INT15 memory will collide with it).
This is because HIMEM is grabbing all of extended memory and now has that as
part of its memory pool to hand out on demand. 

Windows/386 uses INT15 for memory detection (I think), since it's not really
designed to cooperate with XMS. My own experiments with this were somewhat
puzzling; Windows/386 2.11 (which included HIMEM) did seem to be able to start
with XMS memory allocated, but it would corrupt the contents of that memory. As
part of its memory test, it would overwrite the first two DWORDs of every 64K
memory block [4]. However, if I allocated memory using INT15, that would be
untouched by Win386. It's possible that it only performs the memory test to
probe how much memory is available if INT15 returns 0, or that if INT15 returns
a nonzero quantity, it only probes up until the end of INT15-reported memory.

In any event, Windows 3.0 and later, as discussed earlier, needed to be able to
not only give out XMS memory to any callers in DOS boxes, but also respect
existing XMS allocations made prior to Windows startup. This requires some
means of detecting where the XMS memory is (as this XMS memory must not only be
considered off-limits for Windows to allocate later as extended memory, but
also mapped globally in all DOS virtual machines

This suggests some secret interface between Windows and HIMEM.SYS.


BEHAVIOR OF XMS MEMORY UNDER WINDOWS 3 AND ABOVE
XMS supports an API call allowing the programmer to "lock" an extended memory
block in place, theoretically preventing it from moving. Normally, XMS blocks
are addressed using opaque "handles", but if extended memory were to be used 
for DMA, for example, one would need a fixed address to send to the DMA 
controller. The "lock" call provides the address. In XMS version 2.0, the
linear address of the extended memory block is returned. In XMS version 3.0,
the physical address of the extended memory block is returned. Right off the
bat, there was enough confusion on all sides (both XMS driver vendors and 
authors of applications using XMS) that this interface was rarely used 
correctly, and not even guaranteed to be implemented correctly.

When operating under "raw" DOS, there's no difference between physical and 
linear addresses, so such problems could fall under the rug. Even in EMM386,
it usually lined up, but in multitaskers such as Windows, this could cause
problems. The Virtual DMA Services (VDS) standard helped smooth over some of
the issues with programming DMA in these environments, but it wasn't a total
solution.

First of all, in Windows 3.0 and above, you cannot lock XMS handles allocated
after Windows started. The reasoning may not be clear yet, but it should become
clear soon.

However, when it comes to XMS handles allocated *before* Windows began, there are 
some restrictions. Remember that XMS handles most certainly can be locked 
before Windows begins, so if a program locks an XMS handle and obtains an 
address, it should be able to assume that that address will remain valid after
Windows starts. In fact, an XMS handle can be locked multiple times, and one 
could reasonably expect that the values (other than the lock count) shouldn't 
change after locking it multiple times.

What happens with XMS handles allocated before Windows starts, then? Well, on 
my Windows 3.1 system, XMS version 3.0 is reported, meaning that I'm dealing
with physical addresses. I allocated an XMS handle A908, and then locked it,
getting a physical address of 310000 (the lowest I've seen is 110000, see 
above, but I had SMARTDRV and some other device drivers loaded). When I loaded
into Windows, I could still lock the block and got the same value. I then wrote
a 32-bit DPMI test app that is capable of dealing with linear addresses
directly, and sure enough, trying to use the address 310000 caused a page
fault. However, using the "Map Physical Address To Linear Address" service in
DPMI, I was able to get the linear address 710000. 

The reason for this has to do with a quirk of the design of Windows/386 and
enhanced Windows 3.x. Dating all the way back to Windows/386, there's an API
call "MapLinear" which accomplishes fundamentally the same purpose. Enhanced
Windows 3.x provides a VMM service "MapPhysToLinear" which is callable by VxDs,
and the DPMI server inside of Win386 presumably provides a very thin wrapper
over that function. On Windows/386 and enhanced Windows 3.x, only the first 4MB
(excluding the first 64KB due to some 80386 errata which causes it to be 
identity-mapped) of address space is per-VM, meaning that switching address
spaces, rather than being a matter of altering the page directory base register
(CR3), actually involves changing the first DWORD of the page directory to swap
out the mappings for that low 4MB, and everything else is considered global.

This was considered fine at the time, since 4MB was well above the 1MB limit 
that real-mode DOS apps ran into, and provided breathing room for the HMA. 
After that per-VM memory, at the 4MB line, sits the first 16MB of physical
memory, identity-mapped. In the time period of Windows/386 and Windows 3.0, 
this was probably just considered enough for your entire machine (and sure 
enough, those versions max out at 16MB of usable memory) since that was an 
outrageous amount of memory at the time, but even later, VxDs mainly only 
needed to convert physical addresses to linear to access memory-mapped I/O, 
which due to the design of the ISA bus, usually sat below 16MB. Anyways, the
address 710000H = 310000H + 400000H, and 40000H is 4MB. The MapPhysToLinear
function just added 4MB to the address that you put into it back in those 
days. Note that any DPMI memory that you allocated came out of the global
memory region above 2GB, which is where the VxDs lived. In Windows 95, 
MapPhysToLinear works differently, since the address space between 4MB and 2GB
isn't global anymore, as the Win32 arena sits there (all Win32 processes share
the low 4MB of address space, as that's where Win16 lives, but they have a 
private Win32 arena).

Back to why XMS memory allocated during Windows' runtime can't be locked - 
it's because it isn't guaranteed to be physically contiguous, so obtaining its
physical address (as XMS version 3.0 requires) would be meaningless. DPMI
memory (which may come from the same pool, I'm not sure) can be locked, but
there's no API call to query the physical address of a linear memory block in
DPMI, likely for precisely this reason.

Note that curiously enough, in Windows NT, XMS version 2.0 is implemented, and
blocks allocated can be locked. Of course, NT doesn't have to remain coherent
with DOS state (and continue to keep its own state in sync with DOS), and I
believe that the XMS memory is only valid within that DOS box (and only valid
as long as a DOS program is running; if you launch a DOS app from CMD.EXE and
then it exits and you start a new app, I believe that the XMS handle is gone,
since the NTVDM has exited, but if you start from COMMAND.COM, then execute a
DOS app that allocates XMS memory, and then it returns and you start a new app
from that COMMAND.COM instance, it would still be valid - I think TSRs also 
only work if started from COMMAND.COM, though I'm not sure).


MANAGING EXTENDED MEMORY
IBM DOS 3.0 introduced a device driver known as VDISK.SYS, which supported
creating a high-speed RAM disk device (i.e. a block storage device with a
filesystem, but backed by high-speed RAM). It was one of the first uses of
extended memory, and used the INT15 AT BIOS functions to copy data to/from
extended memory. It also monopolized INT15 extended memory, meaning that it
would report 0 extended memory to any further applications that asked.

However, IBM wasn't so inconsiderate as to be ignorant of future
applications that may wish to use extended memory while coexisting with
VDISK. As a result, IBM introduced the "VDISK header", which is a small
header at the start of extended memory indicating that <n>K of RAM is in
use. If a header is there, the program checks <N>K further for another
header. If no such header exists, the program inserts one of its own.

VDISK was ultimately replaced by Microsoft's RAMDRIVE.SYS, which fulfilled
fundamentally the same purpose. Initial versions of RAMDRIVE allocated
extended memory via INT15 (I'm not sure if it did this top-down or via
VDISK headers), but by DOS 5, it used XMS.


1: https://hwiegman.home.xs4all.nl/msdos/74977.htm
2: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20160808-00/?p=94036
3: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20160503-00/?p=93397
4: https://virtuallyfun.com/2025/09/06/unauthorized-windows-386/
